 I make bold to say that had Mr. Yakub Hasan been allowed to go to Malabar, had I not been warned against entering Malabar, had Mussulmans of real influence been invited to go, this long drawn out agony could have been avoided. But it is not yet too late. The sword has been tried for three months, and it has failed to answer the purpose. It has not bent the proud Moplah. Nor has it saved Hindus from his depredations and lust. The sword has merely prevented the Moplah from overrunning the whole of the Madras Presidency. It has exhibited no power of protection I am sure you will not plead incapacity. It is true that the police and the military are not transferred subjects. But you cannot escape moral responsibility. You are supporting the policy of the Government regarding Malabar. Nor, I hope, will you retort by blaming the non co operators. They cannot admit any responsibility for the trouble at all, unless all agitation is to be held blame worthy I admit however that non co operators were not able to take their message to the Moplah homes. That would be a reason for more, not less, agitation. But I have not taken up the pen to argue away non cooperators, blame. I ask you to consider the broad humanities of the question, compel the Government to suspend hostilities, issue promise of free pardon for past depredations upon an undertaking to surrender, and to permit non co operators to enter Malabar to persuade the Moplahs to surrender. I know that the last suggestion means the giving of importance to non co operators. Surely you do not doubt their numbers or influence. If you do, you should find other means of dealing with the trouble than that of extermination. I am merely concerned with the termination of the shameful inhumanity proceeding in Malabar with both Liberals and non co operators as helpless witnesses. I have chosen to address this letter not to the Government but to you, because the Government could not have taken the inhuman course of destruction without your moral support. I beseech you to give heed to my prayer as of a dear friend. I am, Your friend, M. K. GANDHI Young India, 1 12 1921